Thank you and good afternoon.
So we're going to talk this
afternoon a little bit on building
computational clusters with
Mac OS X Server and with XServe.
And I think it's really important
before we get too far into the
presentation to make sure we are all
here understanding the right thing.
Clustering is one of
those really powerful,
overloaded words that means a
lot of things to a lot of people.
And I get asked all the time, ooh,
I want to cluster my Xserves.
Well, what does that mean?
And so I think it's important to
recognize that clusters are used,
the term clustering is actually
used in two very distinct areas.
The first is clustering
for high availability.
I want to take a server service
and cluster two or more servers
together for high availability
such that if one would go down,
the other one takes over its place
with ideally no network interruption.
That's something very different than
what we're here to talk about today,
which is clustering for
computational ability.
Aggregating the computational performance
of several servers together to
generate a larger compute farm per se.
So just to be clear,
that's what we're going to be
talking about this afternoon.
Anyone interested in learning a
little bit more about applications
for high availability with XServe,
invite you to my session tomorrow
afternoon on deploying XServe,
where we'll touch on some approaches
to the other kind of clustering.
So let's talk a little bit about
what we want to cover in this
session and dive right into it.
So obviously the first thing might be
why I might want to build a cluster.
What goals would it deliver for me?
How can we use Xserve and
Mac OS X Server in a cluster?
What are the benefits and advantages?
Typical cluster architecture.
What does it mean to build a cluster?
What is the topology, the network,
the basic system requirements,
and physical requirements
needed to do that?
We'll talk a little bit about
deploying applications on a cluster,
what kind of things can be distributed,
and some approaches to that.
Physical network concerns.
When you bring a large number
of CPUs into a certain area,
there are obviously requirements that go
above and beyond the number of machines.
It requires planning on power, cooling,
and network requirements.
We'll touch on the requirements
in those areas as well.
Tools and techniques
for deploying a cluster.
What resources are available?
What tools?
are available and highlight
some of those capabilities.
[Transcript missing]
The other advantage of clusters is that,
and we'll talk more about this,
is that it's very easy to scale a
cluster to both budget and problem.
So, you know, based on a given budget,
you can, you know,
very granularly add more
computing power by adding more
compute elements to a problem.
And, of course,
it's also easy to scale out that cluster
based on the size of your problem.
And so,
if you need more computational power,
add some more modular servers
to your cluster deployment.
So it makes it very
flexible in these areas.
Some example applications,
so take some of the
more obvious ones first.
Image manipulations, rendering,
compositing,
the only way these digital effects
that are being done in theaters
today are being generated is by
massive computation behind the scenes.
And again, clustering is the way to
achieve some of these goals.
Simulation, biology,
simulating car crashes, airplanes,
financial models of the markets
is something very well mapping out
to compute cluster environments.
And of course,
one of the mainstays in the cluster
market and some of the areas where
we're seeing some of the biggest,
strongest,
earliest successes with Xserve is in
the life sciences with genomics and
other kind of life science analysis.
Let me give you some examples.
So, let me give you some
more dramatic examples.
So, Pixar's Toy Story,
they have an amazing little website
up on their pixar.com website.
And there's a whole category
called "How We Do It," you know,
behind the scenes.
And on that site, they talk about what it
took to build Toy Story 2.
And the example they give is
the average frame in Toy Story 2
took six hours to render.
Now,
I'll stress average because they also
highlight some of the more complex
work took closer to 80 hours a frame.
So, that's a lot of work.
So, let's talk about the average frame.
But just as an example,
six hours a frame,
if you do a little bit of quick math
and you multiply that by 24 frames a
second times 60 seconds in a minute
times 92 minutes in the feature film,
that turns out to be around, you know,
shy of 800,000 hours or, you know,
roughly 92 years of
computation behind that.
And that's, you know,
just for the rendering piece of the film.
So, you can imagine that the only
way to deliver this kind of
work is to use the feature film.
So, you can imagine that the only
way to deliver this kind of
work is to use the feature film.
deliver this kind of result
is with massive computational
clustering power behind the scenes.
It's also interesting
that this is Toy Story 2,
which is a number of years ago.
I can only imagine what
Finding Nemo took to render.
Look at another example is in the
genomic life sciences environment.
The fact is that the data that
needs to be analyzed is growing
significantly faster than Moore's law.
Processors aren't getting as
fast as the data is growing.
Moore's law processor speed
doubles every 18 months.
This is data from GenBank, NCBI.
Roughly in the same timeframe,
the amount of data is
growing by the order of 8X.
The only way to do this is
aggregating computing power.
Let's talk a little bit about XServe.
Why do we think XServe has a
story in the computational space?
Well, a couple of different reasons.
First and foremost,
in the 1U form factor,
we're able to deliver quite a bit of
processing power in a small form factor.
When we couple that with
velocity engine in the G4,
XServe becomes a very potent
machine for computational analysis.
I'll save the question now,
which is the G5 question with XServe.
A lot of people ask me that.
I'm sure that will come up in Q&A.
I'll mention it now.
I'm not able to comment and answer
that question for you today.
But anyone who's seen the G5 machines
when they were here earlier in the week,
the heat sink is rather significant.
And so I have a little bit of a
challenge to get this in an XServe,
but it will be an interesting challenge.
Regarding Mac OS X,
Mac OS X is a tremendous advantage
for XServe in the cluster space in
that we have a very powerful open
source BST core Unix operating system.
That can leverage the major open source
projects and compile major applications
out in industry and yet take advantage
of an operating system that's very
easy to deploy and easy to maintain.
This is a real highlight of
XServe and Mac OS X server.
And we'll talk actually some of
the ways you can very easily and
rapidly deploy Mac OS X servers
and XServe in this space.
And finally, remote management.
Rack mounted servers are meant
to live in a rack and not with
the system administrator in front
of the rack at all the times.
And clusters are even more
so in that environment.
And so having powerful remote management
tools is essential to be able to maintain
and monitor the status of a cluster.
[Transcript missing]
Let's talk a little bit about
a typical cluster deployment.
What does it typically look like when we
deploy XServe in a cluster environment?
And so there are three main pieces
in XServe cluster deployments.
We'll start with what we'll call the top,
which is the head node.
The head node,
and actually in the cluster we have here,
is built upon this model
as the top machine.
Typically this is a full XServe
with multiple drive bays.
This is really the machine
responsible for managing the cluster.
Obviously it typically runs the
software to distribute the load,
manage user access,
provide storage to the compute
elements in the cluster.
That could be through internal
storage or through external storage.
And again,
in this example here we have on
stage an XServe RAID providing
the storage for that head node.
One of the most important
pieces in a cluster is,
of course, the interconnect network.
So typically,
the head node is the only machine
that you have connected to your
campus or corporate network,
production network per se.
It's typically the only thing
that's directly accessible
to end users on the network.
The interconnect network
actually connects the head
node to the compute elements.
This can be done in a number of ways.
In most traditional fashion is using
Ethernet networking technologies,
100 megabit networks or gigabit
networks for added performance.
We have mirror net capabilities
on Mac OS X and Mac OS X Server.
So mirror net is a high-performance
PCI interconnect card with extremely
low latencies between nodes.
And for certain kinds of applications,
this is very, very important.
And so mirror net is an option available.
And so there's also an
accompanying mirror net switch
that allows that interconnect.
And actually,
FireWire becomes very interesting for
smaller clusters as an interconnect.
Since for the cost of a cable,
you can chain several XSERVs together,
especially with FireWire
800 built in on XSERV.
And that's actually why on the
back of the XSERV that when
we introduced FireWire 800,
we made sure that there were two ports
of FireWire 800 on the back so that we
could chain down the back of a small
cluster and have FireWire connectivity.
Now, FireWire has a lot of interesting
properties as an interconnect network.
It has extremely low latencies.
It has DMA capability between nodes,
which means one node can DMA memory out
of another node without any processor
intervention by the secondary host.
We also have in the latest
revisions of Mac OS X Server have
added IP over FireWire.
So we have the ability to
run standard IP networking.
And any application that
takes advantage of standard
IP stacks can take advantage of.
The FireWire network built
right into Mac OS X Server.
So this becomes very interesting, again,
for the cost of a FireWire
9-pin to 9-pin cable.
Chain down a small cluster, you know,
somewhere between four
and eight machines.
This is really ideal.
No additional switching costs.
And of course,
the workhorse of the cluster is
of course the compute elements.
So any number of compute elements can be
added to the environment and scale that
up to your specific tasks and problems.
So the way we'd see this
deployed with XServe hardware is,
of course, an XServe standard server
configuration as the head node,
providing storage and network access.
Optionally,
an XServe RAID for up to two and a half
terabytes of RAID-protected storage,
again, through fiber channel,
which are represented by
the heavy white lines.
An XServe compute node configurations,
and, of course,
in this particular example,
a 10100 Ethernet switch.
So if we look beyond the hardware now,
let's talk about some of the other
issues that we have to deal with
when we look at deploying clusters,
which are some of the most interesting
things from a XSERVE perspective,
which is deployment and management.
So obviously the first things we have
to look at are physical concerns.
You know,
where is this equipment going to live?
What are the power, environmental,
and networking requirements?
And also logical concerns, you know,
software installation, configuration,
management.
So let's take each of these individually.
So let's first talk about
power environmentals.
So Xserve actually has quite
an interesting advantage in
that with the G4 processor,
it has quite a low power consumption
and heat output compared to other
competing processors in its class.
So when we look at the Xserve,
off the back of the data sheet,
we rate it at 3.6 amps at 345 watts.
Now this, I should add, is for a fully,
fully loaded system,
if you stuff every possible
thing you could in the box,
and that actually has
margin on top of that.
What we've actually found is that when
you actually measure real-world usage,
when you max the processor at 100%,
running velocity engine optimized code,
really leveraging the processing
power out of the Xserve,
you're going to really have to work
hard to draw around 2 amps at 134 watts.
So the actual real-world
power consumption,
is actually much lower than
the actual system rating.
And we actually publish these
numbers in our knowledge base,
kbase.info.apple.com.
And we also publish BTUs per hour,
which is just shy of 460 BTUs an
hour for a dual processor system.
So for one system,
that's not too much of a challenge.
You can pretty much plug an
XServe in just about anywhere
and not have a problem.
But what happens is when you
rack a whole bunch of these in a
space and multiplying these out,
you've got to really take into account
both power and heat requirements.
So if you multiply those by 16,
you start getting nearly 60 amps
and about 5,500 watts of power.
Obviously much lower than that
in real world consumption.
But you do have to plan
up for startup currents,
which are actually close
to rated consumption.
And one of the things that you can
do is actually stagger the startup
in the cluster to prevent maximum
current load at power up time.
And of course, over 7,000 BTUs an hour.
So from an environmental space,
making sure you have adequate cooling for
a room that's going to host a cluster is,
of course, critical.
So, you know, the big things here is,
of course, that obviously you need to
plan for these requirements.
You know, if your, you know,
UPS becomes critical and being able
to plan appropriately for that.
One of the strategies that we're
starting to see is typically
the most important element in a
compute cluster is providing power,
backup power for the
head node in the storage.
So,
very rarely do you actually put all the
elements on protected backup power since
if you have resource management software,
any terminated computation
will be restarted automatically
when an element's available.
So, the head node is really the
critical piece in this whole puzzle.
So the next thing becomes
an issue of the networking.
What kind of problems do you have and
what kind of interconnects are required
to be able to manage this cluster?
And so one of the big
factors becomes how much I.O.
does the particular compute task do and
whether you get the bang for the buck
deploying gigabit Ethernet as an example
across a series of compute elements.
If there's heavy I.O., there might
be dramatic advantages to adding that
kind of network behind the scenes.
Other types of compute
jobs don't require that.
It's very compute focused and sits in
processes on a small amount of data.
And a great example of that,
kind of a more dramatic example of that,
is, for example, SETI at Home, right?
If you've ever run the
SETI at Home client,
even over a very low
speed modem connection,
it will download a block of data and
it will sit and churn on it for hours.
So having a high performance
network back to the machine doling
out the work is not real critical.
However, other problems,
that's not the case.
The other question
becomes that of latency.
A lot of computational problems are
what you might call embarrassingly
parallel in that a job can be sent
out across a whole bunch of nodes
and with no dependencies on it,
they'll just sit and churn
and then return the results.
Other problems have very tight
dependencies that the results of
one computation will get fed into
the results of another computation
and they'll be tightly coupled.
And so having low latency,
not necessarily bandwidth,
but low latency between
the machines becomes very,
very critical.
And this is where solutions like
MirrorNet become important because
of that low latency interconnect.
And of course,
the other thing that you'll
always want to manage is just
who can connect to this cluster.
And typically,
access is provided through the head
node and secured through the head node.
So you authenticate into the head node,
submit your job to the head node,
and the work begins to
be managed from there.
Let's take a look at some
of the logical concerns,
the management.
And this is an area where we actually
have a lot of advantages with the tools
that are provided in Mac OS X Server.
What's interesting is that
a lot of the tools that we
provide in Mac OS X Server for
desktop management become very
applicable for cluster management.
And so tools like cloning tools, Netboot,
and network install become very,
very valuable in cluster management.
The reality is that for a cluster,
more often than not,
every compute element needs to
have the exact same system image,
exact same access to tools.
And so Netboot becomes a very,
very viable way to manage and
have basically a single system
image across your entire cluster.
And actually,
when we add some of the headless
tools that we provide out of the box
with Mac OS X Server and with XServe,
literally you can take a brand
new XServe out of the box,
hold down a button on the front panel,
and have it Netboot off your head node.
It really provides quick
out-of-the-box deployment for XServe.
Of course,
remote management tools are essential.
Again, clusters are meant to live,
interact somewhere.
You should be able to
access them from anywhere.
You may choose to provide
command line access with things
like SSH or provide web tools,
so provide web interfaces.
And you'll see some examples
of that in this session.
And finally, user accessibility.
I actually just touched on that.
You know,
web interface and terminal access.
And finally, backup.
Being able to have a backup
strategy for the head node,
being able to back up that critical data.
Again, typically in these deployments,
the compute elements themselves
are thought of as disposable.
They're quick to replace or re-image.
It's really the head node
that becomes critical in the
storage that's provided there,
particularly the computation
programs and the results.
So before I introduce my next speaker,
I wanted to highlight and we'll
kind of bring up some of the things
that we typically say for the end of
these presentations up to the front.
I wanted to really highlight some of the
key cluster resources that are available
for Mac OS X and Mac OS X Server.
In the SciTech lunch yesterday,
someone asked about Apple providing
an MPI stack and whether they
thought that was important.
I think one of the interesting things
I think you'll see here is that this
is an area where we have actually a
wealth of solutions to choose from.
And we actually prefer having a large
number of excellent open source and
third-party solutions available.
So if we look at some of the examples,
one of the keys of any cluster
deployment is DRM software,
Digital Distributed Resource Management.
And we have a number of
solutions to choose from.
Platform LSF, SunGrid Engine, OpenPBS,
PBS Pro.
Some of the top examples.
High-performance computing tools.
So again, in the MPI stack area, MPitch,
MPI Pro, LAMMPI, Lyndon Paradise,
and Pooch from Dogger
Research are all great examples
of solutions in this space.
all available for Mac OS X.
Grid Computing Tools, Gridiron Software,
a really excellent piece of
distributed application resource.
Globus Toolkit was actually ported
to Mac OS X from the bio team and
has a port available from them.
Science and Research Applications.
You'll see a demo of Grid Mathematica
a little later in this session.
Excellent tool for a number
of kinds of computation.
Life Science Applications, Turbo Blast,
Turbo Hub, Turbo Bench from Turbo Works.
Bioinformatics Toolkit,
which is a set of life
sciences applications that
have been ported to Mac OS X,
kind of a single-click,
double-clickable installer for Mac OS X.
And Inquiry Bioinformatics,
those same solutions wrapped up into
a really easy deployment solution.
You'll hear more about that in a minute.
So, with that said,
I'd like to introduce our next speaker,
Michael Athanas from the bio team.
Michael is a principal investigator
and a founding partner and is
going to talk to you a little bit
more about accessible clustering.
Michael.
Thanks.
Does this work?
Again, my name is Michael Athanas,
and I'm a scientist and co-founder
of a bioinformatic consulting
group called the BioTeam.
One of the interesting things
I learned from one of my hosts here
at the conference is that one out
of nine attendees is a scientist.
Is that true?
Scientists here?
I'm actually quite impressed
at the way this platform is,
it seems to resonate with
the scientific community.
It's very well matched.
Anyway,
So what motivates me as a bioinformatics
consultant in the morning is how to
take advantage of boundless computing.
In this presentation,
I'm going to briefly talk about some of
the pressures in life science computing,
just expand a little bit
beyond what Doug talked about.
Briefly talk about computing
solutions with emphasis on clustering,
and then talk about instant clustering.
I'll explain that as we go along.
Quickly, the BioTeam is a group of
scientists focused upon
delivering life science solutions.
The group,
what makes us somewhat unique is
that we're somewhat vendor agnostic.
We work with all sorts of platforms,
including Apple platforms as well.
The principals of BioTeam have
been working together on several
projects over the past few years,
and most recently a great
deal of projects with Apple.
This list here shows some of the
clients that we've worked with,
and actually I've bumped into
representatives of some of these
organizations at this conference as well.
So again,
what motivates me as a bioinformatics
consultant is to get my clients
to think about what you could
do with boundless computing.
That is, what if CPU was not a limitation
in modeling and simulation?
What if you had very fast access
to terabytes of information?
And what's the most appropriate way
to visualize the knowledge that is
derived from these data analyses?
In doing so,
the computing has to be accessible.
And in order to do that,
some level of abstraction
has to be defined.
Apple seems to be great
at this in terms of,
for example, the finder,
the emphasis is on the user experience
as opposed to the nuts and bolts
of the computing behind the scenes.
It's true to enable
scientific computing as well.
It's not about the computers,
it's about the applications and pipelines
involved in the scientific computation.
So what is important from a scientist
perspective is quick data access,
reliable fast execution,
and application interoperability.
What is not so important in
order to carry out science is the
nuts and bolts of the computing,
you know, the details of the storage,
how the storage is laid out,
or even what type of processor is used.
It really doesn't matter,
and it shouldn't matter from
a scientific perspective.
[Transcript missing]
computing problems and clustering
can be an appropriate solution.
There are benefits to clustering,
as Doug pointed out,
and perhaps some arguments
against clustering.
And I'm going to augment what Doug was
talking about in terms of why clustering.
Well, I think one of the most
compelling reasons to go for
clustering is scalability,
because in terms of scientific research,
it's very difficult to forecast what
you're going to be doing tomorrow.
Clustering inherently is
a blueprint for growth.
If you architect the system properly,
you can increase your computing power
in step with your computational need.
Another compelling reason is price
performance of commodity hardware.
We've seen that, you know,
with the announcement of the G5
dual processor box for only $3,000,
That same computing power,
if I wanted to buy it
four or five years ago,
would probably be tens,
if not a hundred thousand
dollars for the same thing.
Computing is getting ridiculously cheap.
If you look at the curve,
they're going to be giving
it away pretty soon.
So the trick is,
how do we take advantage of it?
[Transcript missing]
Construct your architecture based
upon the scientific demands of the
applications in your infrastructure.
There are many parameters that you
can tweak from a hardware perspective.
For example, as Doug was pointing out,
there are network alternatives.
That decision is based
upon the applications that
are within your workflow.
Also, there are storage options as well.
Do you take advantage of local
caching on the individual nodes,
or do you use some kind of
network or SAN available storage?
And even the processors,
there are some applications may take
advantage of different processors
or accelerators better than others.
And I think one of the interesting
flexibility issues that we're
seeing in the industry is
A compelling reason is clusters kind of
transcend the single vendor solution.
You're allowed to build a cluster
of components that are optimal to
your workflow as opposed to a single
vendor providing everything which
some of the components may be ideal,
some may not.
Reliability is another
reason for clustering,
and this may not be so obvious.
Doug pointed this out a little bit,
but with careful
architecture of a cluster,
careful identification of
single points of failure,
your cluster can have
extremely high availability,
high uptime.
The architecture can be such
that if a compute element dies,
you just pop it out like you would
replace a light bulb in your home.
You wouldn't have to shut down the
grid of your home and unsolder the
light bulb and solder a new one in.
You just unscrew it and plug it in.
But clustering is not appropriate for
all applications or all workflows or...
or types of scientific research.
Not all applications map to
loosely coupled architectures.
An example of this could be
relational database engines.
Another reason why clustering
may not work out very well
is management complexity.
If you don't pay careful attention
to the initial architecture,
the effort required to maintain your
system may scale with the number
of elements within your cluster.
That's a sign of failure.
I think one of the more compelling
reasons why clustering can be difficult
is user application complexity.
You may have a really good application
that runs great on a single processor,
but you need a thousand times that.
How do you break that up
and run it in parallel?
Really depends upon the application,
the tools that were
used to construct that.
There isn't a silver bullet that
you can use to automatically
paralyze an application.
It still takes special skill to do that.
Reliability is also on this list because
if the architecture is not correct,
you can have, and you don't pay attention
to single points of failure,
it may be very difficult to maintain.
Also, achieving high utilization seems
to be an important consideration.
It comes back to the user application.
If you don't get the degree
of parallelization necessary
to utilize the cluster,
then you're kind of wasting
all your compute elements.
This is a different topological view of
what Doug showed earlier in terms of the,
we call it the portal architecture.
And again,
this is a great way of abstracting
the computing resources from both
from an administrative perspective
as well as a user perspective.
Neither administrator or users are
allowed to access the individual
nodes within the private subnet in
which the cluster elements reside on.
And because you do this,
then the nodes become anonymous.
That allows you to replace
them if something goes wrong.
You guys skip this.
So I mentioned scalability.
Again, I think scalability is a crucial
issue that clustering can address.
But there are many characteristics
of what scalability is.
Scalability in terms of quantity of data
that you're distributing on the cluster.
Scalability in terms of number of
users that are hitting the system.
All those have to be addressed
in terms of the architecture.
I think one of the more
significant components of achieving
scalability is fault tolerance.
How is your system going to be
aware of some kind of adverse
event within your cluster?
The flip side of fault
tolerance is automation.
How are you going to respond to
that adverse condition so that
you can continue to process so you
don't need extensive management
or monitoring capability to ensure
completion of your workflow?
Okay, so I wanted to contrast two
different approaches for computing.
The mainframe SMP monolithic approach
compared to the clustering approach.
Again, one thing that's going against
the clustering approach
is application complexity.
It's definitely more difficult to
make full usage of a cluster than
if you had an SMP type machine.
However, what's going against the
mainframe SMP approach to
computing is the upfront cost.
A mainframe type system with comparable
compute power of a cluster can be
about 4 to 20 times more expensive.
As I mentioned,
a cluster architecture can
give you better scalability,
but countering the upfront cost of the
mainframe system is the total cost of
ownership of maintaining that system.
If you don't architect
your cluster correctly,
then it can be extremely
expensive to maintain.
So if you can address the application
complexity and the management complexity,
then the clustering solution
can be very compelling.
Okay,
I'm going to switch gears a little bit
and talk about the BioTeam Inquiry.
The Inquiry was an award last night,
an Apple Designer Award in
the category of Server.
and David So what is inquiry?
The concept behind inquiry is
instant scalable informatics,
just add hardware.
So the concept is to provide a full
functioning informatics solution and
you start out with an empty cluster.
And the fun part is that we can
do this in about 20 minutes.
So what we do with inquiry,
we've deployed many clusters,
many types of clusters,
but there's some common denominator
that we see in our deployments.
We've taken these best practices
in terms of network configuration,
OS configuration, various optimizations,
deploying the right administration tools,
monitoring tools,
but we don't stop there.
If we stop there,
that would be a fine cluster that
you can use from an IT basis,
but we go beyond that.
Our goal is to enable the scientists,
in this case,
the bioinformatics scientists.
The inquiry cluster is loaded with
more than 200 open source applications,
which are all cluster enabled,
and we provide a
consistent user interface,
a web interface to all
these applications.
And on top of that, we deploy about 100
gigabytes of genomic data.
So as soon as the cluster is up,
you're ready to fire.
So the idea is to go from the
many computer concept to a
single virtual computing resource
that is usable by a scientist.
But we go beyond that.
Like I said before,
we don't want to necessarily train
scientists to become computer scientists.
We want to empower them to go from,
to abstract the command line into
something that is more accessible.
So Inquiry is an orchestration of
many open source tools and utilities.
Just to mention a couple of
the components behind Inquiry.
The first one is Pies.
Pies is a very cool tool
from the Pasteur Institute.
The heart of Pies is essentially
a collection of XML documents
describing a bunch of command
line bioinformatic tools.
Starting from this set of XML documents,
we can render an interface,
whether it be a web interface
or a web services interface.
So now that we've
presented the application,
we connect the execution
of that application to the
cluster using Sun Grid Engine,
or we can use platform LSF.
And that's all completely
abstracted away from the user
and integrated within Inquiry.
We've also deployed several
monitoring and administrative
tools that are commonly available
in the open source domain.
For example, this is Ganglia,
and it provides a very nice snapshot
of your cluster and allows you to drill
down to get more detail of the health
of various nodes within your cluster.
In addition,
we provide another perspective of your
cluster from the load management system.
So how are jobs running on your system?
Who's running jobs?
And what jobs are pending?
And everything from the user
job submission perspective.
Because we're using PI's,
we have a great deal of flexibility
in terms of how the application
interfaces are presented to the user.
For each application within Inquire,
we provide two interfaces.
A simple view,
which gives you just the bare
bones of what you need in order
to execute that application.
In addition,
we provide an expert view with all the
bells and whistles of that application,
along with complete documentation
for each of those flags,
for every application within Inquire.
Also within Inquiry,
we manage results that are generated
from the various applications.
Results calculated at different
times are accessible and can be
retrieved and either piped into other
applications or just reexamined.
Okay,
so one of the fun things about Inquiry,
like I said, we can deploy this
within 15 or 20 minutes.
And this is Inquiry.
We deploy it on an iPod.
Okay?
And the idea behind that
is first we take the iPod,
we plug it into the head node,
and we mount the iPod and
run an application called the
Cluster Configuration Tool,
as shown here.
And this tool provides a way of setting
the number of nodes in the cluster,
external IP addresses,
just the external things that is
needed to describe that cluster.
Step two in configuring your
cluster is then you boot off
the iPod from the head node.
And that takes about five or six minutes.
And when that's done,
images for the entire cluster
are loaded onto the head node.
You're essentially done
with the iPod at that point.
And the third step is to boot
each individual node of the
cluster from the head node.
And that can take anywhere from a
few minutes to up to ten minutes,
because depending upon the network,
as Doug pointed out,
that you've deployed within the cluster.
But that can be done in parallel.
So when you look at the aggregate,
it takes about, you know,
15-20 minutes before you
have a fully working cluster.
And that's it.
Congratulations on your award.
I'd now like to introduce Theodore Gray,
Director of User Interfaces for Wolfram,
to talk a little bit about
Grid Mathematica and its solution.
We have the demo machine.
Mathematica is a presentation tool,
so we use it instead of Keynote.
And I just typed in my presentation.
Isn't that typical?
Okay, so the first thing I should say is
that this is actually not my talk.
Ordinarily it would be
given by Roger Germanson,
our director of R&D,
but he could be here,
so I'm giving the talk,
which should be interesting.
At least I didn't have to prepare it.
That's one plus.
So Grid Mathematica is basically the
sort of grid version of Mathematica.
Mathematica itself is
a desktop application.
You can buy it.
It's a very general purpose
programming language and
system for doing mathematics.
There's a product called
Network Mathematica,
which is basically a
network license server.
And there's an application package
called the Parallel Computing Toolkit,
which is an application pack that lets,
one Mathematica session manage
multiple ones on a network.
And then Grid Mathematica
is essentially a marketing
concept of those two together,
and it's cheaper per node than
the regular copy of Mathematica.
But you can actually put together
those different elements separately.
So basically,
one of the goals of Grid Mathematica is,
like has been mentioned
several times before here,
to try to abstract as much as possible
the details of the configuration of
your cluster and sort of what brand of
computer it is and things like that.
So from a system point of view,
you think of a cluster in terms
of you have some processors,
you start processes on them,
you schedule them, and you exchange data.
In the Mathematica view,
you think of having kernel processes,
Mathematica kernel,
that's what we call the
computational engine,
and you have expressions in
the Mathematica language that
you want to have evaluated.
And the sort of grid clustering element
is to distribute those processes,
those Mathematica expressions,
to different kernels
running on a cluster.
And it's sort of,
we try to be buzzword compliant.
And, you know, we're trying to be
So we can handle,
I guess we have the same sort
of general arrangement where
you have a head machine,
which is the master,
and you have these multiple
ones which are not accessible
from the outside world.
And you have Mathematica handling
that communication strictly
between Mathematica processes,
not involving any other sort of
resource management software.
The system is written entirely
in top-level Mathematica code,
which means it's completely
machine-independent,
completely platform-independent,
and you're not restricted
to any of the sort of C data
types or anything like that.
You can use arbitrary
Mathematica expressions,
which could be numbers
or arrays of numbers,
strings,
but also structured symbolic expressions
that represent either mathematical
objects or protein structure or whatever.
It's sort of a general thing.
So it's not just for sort of numerical
or data analysis type things.
You can do, well, abstract mathematical
sorts of things too.
The communication between
processes is through MathLink,
which is our sort of high
level communication protocol.
It uses whichever of the
underlying protocols you'd like.
I think in this case we have it
configured to use TCP between nodes,
but if you have different, you know,
we have devices for various
different kinds of networks.
So you can have either relatively
tightly clustered things
or you could have them on,
you know, distant,
more loosely clustered things.
Our,
[Transcript missing]
and you can do that.
Which I have to admit,
I'm not an expert in cluster computing,
but it sounds great.
And it also,
the sort of concurrency controlling
structures deal with a kernel that
dies or doesn't come back or whatever.
You can sort of shuffle things around,
which we'll also see in a minute.
Okay, so let's actually do this.
We're gonna start Mathematica here, yes.
So these evaluations are
running on the head machine.
It just told us that the name
of the head machine is XSERV0.
We'll kind of use this machine
name as a way of telling
where a calculation is going.
And this is an OS X version.
So this is kind of some
configuration which took most
of yesterday to get right,
but that's because
I didn't know how to do it.
The little bit about plugging
in an iPod and it's automatic,
that would be great.
And so now what we're going
to do is actually launch all,
we're launching 10 kernels,
and that's because there's five
machines with two processors each,
so we're kind of putting one
process on each computer.
So that's finished.
Now we're going to do a little thing.
This command says,
take this expression and evaluate
it on each of the clients.
So you see it's returned XSERV 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 twice,
and each of them is a Mac OS version.
So I should note at this
point that from here on out,
absolutely nothing would be different
about any of these demos in any way,
shape,
or form if this had returned a list of,
you know, Sun and PC or Linux or,
you know, anything else.
There's absolutely nothing
machine-dependent or hardware-dependent
or platform-dependent or anything.
Which, you know, it's sort of,
it's a nice advantage because
if you've built some cluster
and then you find out that,
oh, you built a big Linux cluster,
but now you can get Macs
that are cheaper per,
you know, per CPU cycle,
you could just add some
Macs to it or vice versa.
So let me show you some simple examples
of how you actually use the parallels.
So this is just running
on the local machine,
and this says run the same
command on this particular node,
number one,
and this means run it on all of them,
so we can see.
And obviously you could put
something more interesting,
you could do 100 factorial on
each one and get that back.
Um,
For those of you who are
familiar with Mathematica,
this probably will make somewhat
more sense than to those who aren't,
but this is just showing some
basic Mathematica commands.
Table builds a table of
expressions like this.
And here we're building just sort
of to demonstrate a table of machine
name always on the same machine.
And now we're going to do it on
farming that out to the processors.
Now you notice that it's used the
same machine over and over again.
And that's actually because I discovered
that just a few minutes ago,
because this command is too fast.
So it's done before the load management
is basically saying it's done already,
we'll just do it on the same machine.
But if we slow this down a little bit,
if we put in, let's say,
1000 factorial and suppress the output,
it's still too fast.
Thank you.
All right, so now it's,
you see it's now sort of distributing
a little bit more because the processes
are not actually finishing instantly.
Okay, so another function is map.
Map takes a function and applies it
to each of the arguments in a list.
We do the same thing here.
And again, it's kind of boring
because it's just too fast.
But you get the idea that many of the
sort of programming constructs that
you have in Mathematica for building
tables or for applying functions to
data can be parallelized very easily.
And as long as there isn't, you know,
a data dependency between the
instances of that function,
it'll just work.
And there's a host of other sorts
of commands that are built in,
dot products, inner product animations,
plotting, things like that,
that are automatically -- or
where there's prepared sort
of parallelized versions.
This is an example of how
you distribute data and code.
This is a Mathematica program.
Actually in Roger's version of the talk,
it just added up the numbers 1 through n.
I thought that was silly.
What I had to do is add up the numbers
1 through n and then add the process
ID and then take the factorial of that
just so we would get a better number.
Also,
it proves that I have great confidence
in the system because I have no idea
what the process IDs are going to be.
So we execute this in the head machine.
We've made that definition
on the head machine.
And now we execute it.
And we get a number that is involved
with the process ID in some way.
And now what we're going to
do is export this definition.
And that command took the definition
that we made in the head machine
and distributed it to all the nodes.
Which you can do because
it's not a C program.
It's not something you have to compile.
It's a Mathematica expression
that can be interpreted by
the Mathematica interpreter.
And now we'll go and evaluate
this machine name command.
That will let us see which
one each one executed on.
And we do that.
And so now we have the ten results.
And you'll see each number is
a little bit different because
it had a different process ID.
So, how are we doing for time?
Let me skip these.
And this one,
this is basically showing the
lower level operations where
rather than just do a map,
you can actually set
up a queue where you,
I'm not going to go
through the details here,
but you basically tell it to queue up
these processes and then you can ask for
it to wait for certain ones to finish and
you can wait for a list in which everyone
finishes first will return sort of like a
select call if you're familiar with Unix.
And that allows you,
that's sort of a foundation in
which you can build your own manual
more sophisticated load balancing
and process managing things.
So, now here's an example.
And as I mentioned,
this is actually Roger's talk,
and I don't actually know that
much about parallel computing,
but I thought I would make a little
example and sort of whip something up
for the demo to see if I could do it.
And what this does is it recreates
the keynote demo fractal that
I used a couple days ago,
and this is the code for that fractal.
And so, here, this will run this example
now on the -- just on the head
machine as a single process.
And you see it goes through,
and this is a little sort of
graphical animation progress monitor
thing that I wrote a while ago.
And as you can see,
it's kind of poking along.
You may notice it's not much
slower than the G5 demo.
That's because I'm not computing
as many points and because
it's also not doing the big num
calculation in the background.
It's not, in fact,
the case that this is as fast as a G5.
And there,
it's put the animation together.
So, now let's run it on the grid.
And for those of you
who can see the lights,
look at the lights.
Here we go.
It's very important always to
watch the lights on your cluster.
And here we go.
Now, notice the first frame,
you don't get any
faster because it takes,
you know,
they're all doing it at the same time.
But then once it gets going,
you basically get ten at a time.
So if I'm reading my clock right,
I really need to hurry.
So basically the advantages are,
it's much, much cheaper than buying
separate copies of Mathematica,
if you buy the nodes.
It works in a completely open-ended
heterogeneous environment,
absolutely no restrictions at all
as long as it runs Mathematica.
We have sort of high-level symbolic
representation of the parallel
structures and the parallel
control that you need to do,
or the controls to get good performance.
It's pretty easy to take existing code,
and as long as it's suitable
for parallelization,
it's easy to do that.
And you can do it,
you can do this sort of in the
rich world of Mathematica rather
than the sort of more limited,
you know,
worlds of C and Java or whatever,
where you have to do a lot
more sort of by yourself.
And as a prototyping environment
for parallel algorithms,
of course, it's very nice.
And I guess that's about it.
And we all have to
remember to close these,
otherwise we leave things running.
Thank you.
Okay, well,
I would like to basically wrap up
by pointing to quite a variety of
resources for more information.
So, first of all,
there's been a lot of tracks and
sessions that are relevant to this topic.
And, unfortunately,
a lot of them were earlier in the week.
So, hopefully,
you had a lot of opportunity to
go see some of these sessions this
week on the Enterprise IT track.
If you don't,
I encourage you to watch the videos
since there were some excellent sessions.
There will be a session tomorrow on
deploying Xserve RAID in the afternoon.
I'm sorry, deploying Xserve tomorrow
afternoon and Friday afternoon
on deploying Xserve RAID.
I encourage you to attend those sessions.
On the developer side,
there's some excellent sessions
on development tools for the
Unix layer and performance tools.
And those were, again,
either earlier today or yesterday.
But, again, I encourage you to watch the
videos if you weren't able
to attend those sessions.
Who to contact?
So, again, for information or follow-up,
you're welcome to contact me.
Again, Doug Brooks, my email is up there.
Michael and Theodore
have contacts as well.
And Skip Levins,
who's our server technology evangelist,
wasn't able to attend the session.
But from a developer perspective,
he's your contact from a server
technology point of view.
So, he's a great person to talk to.
technology perspective.
Additional resources.
So we gave you a list
of solutions earlier.
I wanted to point you to a key
page that we've recently put up
about two or three weeks ago,
which is the Compute
Cluster Solutions page.
If you go to the apple.com
slash server page,
you'll find quite a number
of solution-specific pages,
one specifically on clustering,
which highlighted all of the key
solutions that were referenced today.
Again, the same page can provide
product information and,
of course, information on both the bio
team and Grid Mathematica.
This is an area where there's a wealth
of community support from mailing lists.
And so I wanted to make sure you're
well aware of several key mailing lists
that Apple and some third parties host.
Apple hosts the SciTech and
the Unix porting list,
which are both very relevant
to the cluster space.
And bioinformatics.org has some
excellent mailing lists for BioClusters
and BioDarwin development under Darwin.